Emotion Impacts Speech Recognition Performance

Abstract
It has been established that the performance of speech recognition systems depends on multiple factors including the lexical content, speaker identity and dialect. Here we use three English datasets of acted emotion to demonstrate that emotional content also impacts the performance of commercial systems. On two of the corpora, emotion is a bigger contributor to recognition errors than speaker identity and on two, neutral speech is recognized considerably better than emotional speech. We further evaluate the commercial systems on spontaneous interactions that contain portions of emotional speech. We propose and validate on the acted datasets, a method that allows us to evaluate the overall impact of emotion on recognition even when manual transcripts are not available. Using this method, we show that emotion in natural spontaneous dialogue is a less prominent but still significant factor in recognition accuracy.
1 Introduction
Alexa and Google Home are becoming increasingly popular, their use spanning a range of applications from reducing loneliness in the elderly (Reis et al., 2017; Ferland et al., 2018) to child entertainment and education (Druga et al., 2017). As these conversational agents become commonplace, people are likely to express emotion during their interactions, either because of their perception of the agent or because of the emotioneliciting situations in which the agent is deployed.
In this paper, we set out to study the extent to which emotional content in speech impacts speech recognition performance of commercial systems. Similar studies have been conducted in the past to study how recognition varies with gender and dialect (Adda-Decker and Lamel, 2005; Tatman, 2017), lexical content (Goldwater et al., 2010), topical domain (Traum et al., 2015) and delivery style (Siegler and Stern, 1995; Nakamura et al., 2008). A number of studies have studied the impact of stress (Hansen and Patil, 2007; Bou-Ghazale and Hansen, 2000; Steeneken and Hansen, 1999; Hansen, 1996) and emotional factors (Polzin and Waibel, 1998; Kostoulas et al., 2008; Benzeghiba et al., 2007) on speech recognition. Multiple studies (Byrne et al., 2004; Athanaselis et al., 2005; Pan et al., 2006; Meng et al., 2007; Ijima et al., 2009; Sun et al., 2009; Sheikhan et al., 2012) tried to improve upon speech recognition accuracies for emotional speech. However, these studies were carried out with older recognition systems. Recently automatic speech recognition has seen unprecedented gains in accuracy. Yet our work shows that emotional content still poses problems to speech recognition systems.
In our work we seek to quantify the influence of emotion on recognition accuracy for three commercial systems, on several datasets. We start out with two datasets of acted emotion, which are in some respects ideal for the task because the spoken content is constrained to pre-selected utterances and thus manual transcription is not required. In addition, the lexical content for each emotion is identical, so no special adjustment for that confounding factor is needed in the acted corpora.
At the same time, it is important to validate these results on spontaneous, more natural exchanges, so we also present results on such a corpus of emotion in spontaneous speech. As the speech becomes more natural, it becomes harder to obtain large manual transcripts for a large portion of the data to carry out the studies that we present, so we also validate an alternative method for finding factors that influence the performance of commercial systems, relying on agreement between systems rather than manual transcripts. We present convincing evidence that the approach is a reasonable approximation and it can be used for broader studies on factors influencing automatic speech recognition. Here, we apply the method to analyze data from a spontaneous emotional speech corpus.
2 Related Work
There has been much research in the field of emotion recognition from speech. However, relatively less research has been conducted on how emotion affects Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR).
(Polzin and Waibel, 1998) study the variation in word error rate with different emotions NEUTRAL, ANGER, HAPINESS, AFRAID and SADNESS. They observed that SADNESS and AFRAID/FEAR perform worst while NEUTRAL and ANGER perform best. They integrate prosodic features into the model using Hidden Markov Models to first disambiguate the emotional state of the speaker, and then use emotion specific ASR models for transcription. They report a significant increase in ASR performance.
(Kostoulas et al., 2008) conduct a similar study over a much wider range of emotions (About 15 emotions) on the Wall Street Journal database with Sphinx III as the ASR system and report a large variance in the WER across emotions, ranging from about 6% for NEUTRAL to about 44% for HOT ANGER.
(Athanaselis et al., 2005) extract an emotionally colored subset of the British National Corpus (BNC) and append it multiple times to the BNC before training an emotionally-enhanced ASR system.
(Sheikhan et al., 2012) propose that the emotion in speech leads to changes in Mel-frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCC) and thus propose neutralizing MFCCs by warping the first three formant frequencies and conduct their experiments to analyze improvement in ASR performance for the emotions ANGER and HAPPINESS.
In this work, we analyze the performance of multiple modern commercial ASR systems on emotional speech. We further quantify the correlation between the Word Error Rate and emotion. We also compare the dependence of ASR performance on other factors speaker identity and spoken content with the dependence on emotion.
3 Datasets and APIs
We use three acted Emotion datasets: CREMA-D (Cao et al., 2014), RAVDESS (Steven R. Liv-
ingstone1, 2018) and MSP-IMPROV (Busso et al., 2017). CREMA-D has 12 sentences recorded by 91 actors in 6 different emotions (Anger, Disgust, Fear, Happy, Neutral and Sad), for a total of 7,442 very similar to each other (Kids are talking by the door and Dogs are sitting by the door), recorded by 24 actors in 8 emotions with the addition of Surprised and Calm. RAVDESS has a total of 1,440 utterances, and each sentence is recorded in two intensities with two repetitions of each.
In addition to actors recording sentences in a pre-specified emotion, the MSP-IMPROV dataset contains ‘improvised recordings’, where actors converse to induce the desired emotion. In these interactions, there is at least one emotional rendition of the target utterance but other utterances may be emotionally neutral. MSP-IMPROV is comprised of 1,272 utterances distributed over 20 target sentences and four emotions (Neutral, Anger, Happy, Fear). We refer to this part of the corpus as MSP-IMPROV Target, where we only concern ourselves with recognizing the target sentence. We refer to the set of complete conversations as the MSP-IMPROV Dialogue Corpus. Manual transcripts are not available for this part. MSP-IMPROV has 1,085 complete conversations.
Commercial systems used for speech recognition are IBM Watson Speech-to-Text, Google
2
We report two measures of automatic speech recognition performance: the Word Error Rate (WER) and the percentage of completely recognized sentences (CR). Minor semantic and grammatical errors are ignored by manually listing semantically equivalent sentences for computing CR. We report 1 − CR instead of CR to maintain consistency with W E R interpretation, lower the better.
utterances in the dataset.
RAVDESS has just two sentences, which are Cloud Speech-to-Text and Amazon Transcribe. We will denote the APIs simply by IBM, GCP and AWS respectively.
4 Evaluation Metrics
One of the sentences is recorded in three different intensities.

 
 We then perform an ANOVA analysis to determine the statistical significance of each factor in determining the WER.
The dialogues in the MSP-IMPROV corpus do not contain manual transcripts. We propose a metric to analyze the relative performance of different systems with varying emotions when manual transcripts are not available.
We calculate the performance of every system relative to other systems and then report the average of these cross-comparisons. This method accurately predicts the relative performance on emotional and neutral speech consistent with WER/CR results on the other corpora for which transcripts are available.
Corpus Pearson Spearman
CREMA-D 0.73 0.86 RAVDESS 0.82 0.93 MSP-IMPROV 0.74 0.84
Target
Table 2: Spearman and Pearson Correlation between the cross-comparison WER and the observed WER
Performance varies largely with sentences — some show excellent performance while others do not. Performance also varies across APIs—sentences with good performance with one system may perform well with others.
RAVDESS has two similar sentences, and hence it does not make sense to look at performance variation with spoken content on RAVDESS. On MSP-IMPROV Target, the WER varies from lower than 5% for some sentences to above 30% for others. Similar variations are also observed with Speaker Identity.
   Dataset Metric IBM AWS
GCP
18.80 41.78 6.19 15.49 12.56 39.54
 CREMA-D
RAVDESS
MSP-IMPROV Target
WER 10.00 1-CR 24.72 WER 5.08 1-CR 9.17 WER 13.90 1-CR 38.76
13.09 39.20 13.31 56.38 9.21 35.72
Corpus
CREMA-D RAVDESS MSP-IMPROV Target
IBM IBM AWS AWS GCP GCP 0.84 0.74 0.85 0.84 0.63 0.84 0.67 0.69 0.65
        Table1: OverallPerformanceofIBM,AWSandGCP
5 Observations
5.1 Variations across various factors
The overall performance of the APIs on the three datasets is given in Table 1. IBM performs best on 2 out of 3 datasets (CREMA-D and RAVDESS). AWS is, however, more consistent across datasets.
Figure 1 shows how WER varies with emotion. On CREMA-D, N E U T R A L speech is recognized more accurately than emotional speech, with A N G E R most accurately recognized among the emotions, while SADNESS and FEAR are poorly recognized. Similarly on RAVDESS, F E A R has the worst WER. NEUTRAL and ANGER are recognized better than other emotions. On MSPIMPROV Target, ANGER is recognized most accurately, followed by N E U T R A L speech. Overall N E U T R A L utterances for all datasets are more accurately recognized than the combined class of emotional speech. Further, there is a high variation in performance between different emotions. Improving performance while focusing on poorly performing emotions like sadness and fear, which have an extremely bad performance, will help improve speech recognition.
Table 3: Spearman Correlation between two-system cross comparison WER and the observed WER
5.2 Evaluating Performance without Manual Transcripts
When manual transcripts are not available, we treat the output of one API as the reference and get WER for other APIs with respect to it. We refer to this as the cross-comparison WER. We then change the reference API and repeat the process. The performance is reported as the average of all cross-reference WERs. In our case, we use three API’s. Thus the average cross-comparison WER is the average of 9 cross-comparison WERs.
We test our metric on CREMA-D, RAVDESS, and MSP-IMPROV Target by computing Spearman and Pearson’s correlations between the true WER and the average of the nine crosscomparison WERs. The correlations, mentioned in Table 2, are high, all above 0.7, indicating that the approximation is not perfect but overall accurate.


   (a) IBM: WER on CREMA-D,(b) AWS: WER on CREMA-D,(c) GCP: WER on CREMA-D, RAVDESS and MSP-IMPROV Target RAVDESS and MSP-IMPROV Target RAVDESS and MSP-IMPROV Target
Dataset
CREMA-D RAVDESS
MSP-IMPROV Target
MSP-IMPROV Dialogue
Improvisation
Complete Improvised Unimprovised
F-value/ P-value Sentence Emotion Actor
2163 56.6 5.73 0.02/0.87 12.96 12.54 71.78 6.99 13.37
42.89 5.92 5.58 48.37 2.78/0.04 18.75
Improvisation
32.42
Figure 1: Performance based on emotion
      0.11/0.73
0.81/0.48 2.43
 Table 4: Statistical significance of various factors on speech recognition performance. For entries where the P-value is not mentioned, it is almost zero.
 We also conduct experiments to check whether the metric can be based on two systems instead of three. The Spearman Correlations are tabulated in Table 3. The two system cross-comparison metric is representative of the WER but the correlation is not as strong.
In Table 5, we report cross-comparison WER on the MSP-IMPROV Dialogue subcorpus which includes conversations used to evoke the desired emotion for the target sentence so that the required emotion sounds natural rather than acted. Each conversation is between a male and a female speaker. Emotions in natural speech are not as intense as they are in the acted versions. Also, only parts of the conversations contain emotional speech (neutral speech with parts of emotional speech) and it is natural to expect that the influence on recognition rates will be attenuated. It is however still present: ANGER and HAPPINESS have much worse recognition than NEUTRAL speech. Here however the best recognition is for SAD speech.
Emotion
Cross-Comparison WER
 SAD 18.84 NEU 20.73 ANG 23.29 HAP 23.47
 Overall
21.45
 19
Table 5: Cross-comparison WER for MSP-IMRPOV Dialogue
6 Statistical Significance of Emotion, Speaker and Spoken Content
We now report the results of ANOVA analysis on each of the datasets, to compare the statistical significance of emotion, speaker and spoken content (sentence identity in our case) on performance. We compute the WER for each sentence separately. The F-values and P-values of the abovementioned factors are listed in Table 4. As expected, spoken content has the highest impact on performance, other than RAVDESS which is expected to have low F-value for spoken-content. On CREMA-D and RAVDESS, Emotion impacts performance more than Speaker Identity.

On CREMA-D, the F-value for spoken content is about 40 times that of Emotion. Nevertheless, the Emotion and Actor Identity factors are statistically significant. Emotion has a much larger impact than actor identity. On RAVDESS, Emotion is slightly more impactful than Speaker Identity.
On MSP-IMPROV Target, the impact of Speaker Identity is more pronounced. However, on splitting the corpus based on whether the samples were improvised or not, on improvised speech, Emotion has a higher impact than actor identity. For non-improvised speech, Speaker Identity becomes important. Recognizing improvised speech, which is closer to natural speech, is more difficult. The impact of Actor Identity is thus lower (in improvised speech) than nonimprovised speech. Note that the WER is higher for improvised speech (13.5%) compared to nonimprovised speech (10.4%). Surprisingly, the impact of Emotion is higher in improvised speech.
For dialogues, Spoken Content has low significance, likely because factors are averaged out. Actor identity and gender of the interlocutor (together) impact recognition most.
7 Conclusions
We quantified the impact of Emotion on speech recognition performance. We developed a metric to analyze performance for audio samples where manual transcripts are unavailable and showed empirically that this metric works. In future work, we plan to analyze whether acoustic features are predictive of what sentences are likely to be misrecognized and the characteristic features per emotion.
